Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) provides on-demand, scalable computing capacity in the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Cloud. Using Amazon EC2 reduces hardware costs so you can develop and deploy applications faster. You can use Amazon EC2 to launch as many or as few virtual servers as you need, configure security and networking, and manage storage. You can add capacity (scale up) to handle compute-heavy tasks, such as monthly or yearly processes, or spikes in website traffic. When usage decreases, you can reduce capacity (scale down) again.
An EC2 instance is a virtual server in the AWS Cloud. When you launch an EC2 instance, the instance type that you specify determines the hardware available to your instance. Each instance type offers a different balance of compute, memory, network, and storage resources.
Features of Amazon EC2

Instances
Virtual servers.

Amazon Machine Images (AMIs)
Preconfigured templates for your instances that package the components you need for your server (including the operating system and additional software).

Instance types
Various configurations of CPU, memory, storage, networking capacity, and graphics hardware for your instances.

Amazon EBS volumes
Persistent storage volumes for your data using Amazon Elastic Block Store (Amazon EBS).

Instance store volumes
Storage volumes for temporary data that is deleted when you stop, hibernate, or terminate your instance.

Key pairs
Secure login information for your instances. AWS stores the public key and you store the private key in a secure place.

Security groups
A virtual firewall that allows you to specify the protocols, ports, and source IP ranges that can reach your instances, and the destination IP ranges to which your instances can connect.

Access Amazon EC2

You can create and manage your Amazon EC2 instances using the following interfaces:

Amazon EC2 console
A simple web interface to create and manage Amazon EC2 instances and resources. If you've signed up for an AWS account, you can access the Amazon EC2 console by signing into the AWS Management Console and selecting EC2 from the console home page.

AWS Command Line Interface
Enables you to interact with AWS services using commands in your command-line shell. It is supported on Windows, Mac, and Linux. For more information about the AWS CLI , see AWS Command Line Interface User Guide. You can find the Amazon EC2 commands in the AWS CLI Command Reference.

CloudFormation
Amazon EC2 supports creating resources using CloudFormation. You create a template, in JSON or YAML format, that describes your AWS resources, and CloudFormation provisions and configures those resources for you. You can reuse your CloudFormation templates to provision the same resources multiple times, whether in the same Region and account or in multiple Regions and accounts. For more information about supported resource types and properties for Amazon EC2, see EC2 resource type reference in the AWS CloudFormation User Guide.

AWS SDKs
If you prefer to build applications using language-specific APIs instead of submitting a request over HTTP or HTTPS, AWS provides libraries, sample code, tutorials, and other resources for software developers. These libraries provide basic functions that automate tasks such as cryptographically signing your requests, retrying requests, and handling error responses, making it easier for you to get started. For more information, see Tools to Build on AWS.

AWS Tools for PowerShell
A set of PowerShell modules that are built on the functionality exposed by the SDK for .NET. The Tools for PowerShell enable you to script operations on your AWS resources from the PowerShell command line. To get started, see the AWS Tools for PowerShell User Guide. You can find the cmdlets for Amazon EC2, in the AWS Tools for PowerShell Cmdlet Reference.

Query API
Amazon EC2 provides a Query API. These requests are HTTP or HTTPS requests that use the HTTP verbs GET or POST and a Query parameter named Action. For more information about the API actions for Amazon EC2, see Actions in the Amazon EC2 API Reference.

Pricing for Amazon EC2

Amazon EC2 provides the following pricing options:

Free Tier
You can get started with Amazon EC2 for free. To explore the Free Tier options, see AWS Free Tier.

On-Demand Instances
Pay for the instances that you use by the second, with a minimum of 60 seconds, with no long-term commitments or upfront payments.

Savings Plans
You can reduce your Amazon EC2 costs by making a commitment to a consistent amount of usage, in USD per hour, for a term of 1 or 3 years.

Reserved Instances
You can reduce your Amazon EC2 costs by making a commitment to a specific instance configuration, including instance type and Region, for a term of 1 or 3 years.

Spot Instances
Request unused EC2 instances, which can reduce your Amazon EC2 costs significantly.

Dedicated Hosts
Reduce costs by using a physical EC2 server that is fully dedicated for your use, either On-Demand or as part of a Savings Plan. You can use your existing server-bound software licenses and get help meeting compliance requirements.

On-Demand Capacity Reservations
Reserve compute capacity for your EC2 instances in a specific Availability Zone for any duration of time.

Per-second billing
Removes the cost of unused minutes and seconds from your bill.

Components while creating an EC2 instance:
An image – A template that contains the software to run on your instance, such as the operating system.

A key pair – A set of security credentials that you use to prove your identity when connecting to your instance. The public key is on your instance and the private key is on your computer.

A network – A virtual private cloud (VPC) is a virtual network dedicated to your AWS account. To help you get started quickly, your account comes with a default VPC in each AWS Region, and each default VPC has a default subnet in each Availability Zone.

A security group – Acts as a virtual firewall to control inbound and outbound traffic.

An EBS volume – We require a root volume for the image. You can optionally add data volumes.

Step 1: Launch an instance

You can launch an EC2 instance using the AWS Management Console as described in the following procedure. This tutorial is intended to help you quickly launch your first instance, so it doesn't cover all possible options.

To launch an instance
Open the Amazon EC2 console at https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/.

In the navigation bar at the top of the screen, we display the current AWS Region — for example, Ohio. You can use the selected Region, or optionally select a Region that is closer to you.

From the EC2 console dashboard, in the Launch instance pane, choose Launch instance.

Under Name and tags, for Name, enter a descriptive name for your instance.

Under Application and OS Images (Amazon Machine Image), do the following:

Choose Quick Start, and then choose the operating system (OS) for your instance. For your first Linux instance, we recommend that you choose Amazon Linux.

From Amazon Machine Image (AMI), select an AMI that is marked Free Tier eligible.

Under Instance type, for Instance type, select an instance type that is marked Free Tier eligible.

Under Key pair (login), for Key pair name, choose an existing key pair or choose Create new key pair to create your first key pair.

Warning
If you choose Proceed without a key pair (Not recommended), you won't be able to connect to your instance using the methods described in this tutorial.

Under Network settings, notice that we selected your default VPC, selected the option to use the default subnet in an Availability Zone that we choose for you, and configured a security group with a rule that allows connections to your instance from anywhere (0.0.0.0.0/0).

Warning
If you specify 0.0.0.0/0, you are enabling traffic from any IP addresses in the world. For the SSH and RDP protocols, you might consider this acceptable for a short time in a test environment, but it's unsafe for production environments. In production, be sure to authorize access only from the appropriate individual IP address or range of addresses.

For your first instance, we recommend that you use the default settings. Otherwise, you can update your network settings as follows:

(Optional) To use a specific default subnet, choose Edit and then choose a subnet.

(Optional) To use a different VPC, choose Edit and then choose an existing VPC. If the VPC isn't configured for public internet access, you won't be able to connect to your instance.

(Optional) To restrict inbound connection traffic to a specific network, choose Custom instead of Anywhere, and enter the CIDR block for your network.

(Optional) To use a different security group, choose Select existing security group and choose an existing security group. If the security group does not have a rule that allows connection traffic from your network, you won't be able to connect to your instance. For a Linux instance, you must allow SSH traffic. For a Windows instance, you must allow RDP traffic.

Under Configure storage, notice that we configured a root volume but no data volumes. This is sufficient for test purposes.

Review a summary of your instance configuration in the Summary panel, and when you're ready, choose Launch instance.

If the launch is successful, choose the ID of the instance from the Success notification to open the Instances page and monitor the status of the launch.

Select the checkbox for the instance. The initial instance state is pending. After the instance starts, its state changes to running. Choose the Status and alarms tab. After your instance passes its status checks, it is ready to receive connection requests.

Step 2: Connect to your instance

The procedure that you use depends on the operating system of the instance. If you can't connect to your instance, see Troubleshoot issues connecting to your Amazon EC2 Linux instance for assistance.

Linux instances
You can connect to your Linux instance using any SSH client. If you are running Windows on your computer, open a terminal and run the ssh command to verify that you have an SSH client installed. If the command is not found, install OpenSSH for Windows.

To connect to your instance using SSH
Open the Amazon EC2 console at https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/.

In the navigation pane, choose Instances.

Select the instance and then choose Connect.

On the Connect to instance page, choose the SSH client tab.

(Optional) If you created a key pair when you launched the instance and downloaded the private key (.pem file) to a computer running Linux or macOS, run the example chmod command to set the permissions for your private key.

Copy the example SSH command. The following is an example, where key-pair-name.pem is the name of your private key file, ec2-user is the username associated with the image, and the string after the @ symbol is the public DNS name of the instance.


ssh -i key-pair-name.pem ec2-user@ec2-198-51-100-1.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com
In a terminal window on your computer, run the ssh command that you saved in the previous step. If the private key file is not in the current directory, you must specify the fully-qualified path to the key file in this command.

The following is an example response:

The authenticity of host 'ec2-198-51-100-1.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com (198-51-100-1)' can't be established.
ECDSA key fingerprint is l4UB/neBad9tvkgJf1QZWxheQmR59WgrgzEimCG6kZY.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)?
(Optional) Verify that the fingerprint in the security alert matches the instance fingerprint contained in the console output when you first start an instance. To get the console output, choose Actions, Monitor and troubleshoot, Get system log. If the fingerprints don't match, someone might be attempting a man-in-the-middle attack. If they match, continue to the next step.

Enter yes.

The following is an example response:

Warning: Permanently added 'ec2-198-51-100-1.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.

Windows instances
To connect to a Windows instance using RDP, you must retrieve the initial administrator password and then enter this password when you connect to your instance. It takes a few minutes after instance launch before this password is available. Your account must have permission to call the GetPasswordData action. For more information, see Example policies to control access the Amazon EC2 API.

The default username for the Administrator account depends on the language of the operating system (OS) contained in the AMI. To determine the correct username, identify the language of the OS, and then choose the corresponding username. For example, for an English OS, the username is Administrator, for a French OS it's Administrateur, and for a Portuguese OS it's Administrador. If a language version of the OS does not have a username in the same language, choose the username Administrator (Other). For more information, see Localized Names for Administrator Account in Windows in the Microsoft website.

To retrieve the initial administrator password
Open the Amazon EC2 console at https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/.

In the navigation pane, choose Instances.

Select the instance and then choose Connect.

On the Connect to instance page, choose the RDP client tab.

For Username, choose the default username for the Administrator account. The username you choose must match the language of the operating system (OS) contained in the AMI that you used to launch your instance. If there is no username in the same language as your OS, choose Administrator (Other).

Choose Get password.

On the Get Windows password page, do the following:

Choose Upload private key file and navigate to the private key (.pem) file that you specified when you launched the instance. Select the file and choose Open to copy the entire contents of the file to this window.

Choose Decrypt password. The Get Windows password page closes, and the default administrator password for the instance appears under Password, replacing the Get password link shown previously.

Copy the password and save it in a safe place. This password is required to connect to the instance.

The following procedure uses the Remote Desktop Connection client for Windows (MSTSC). If you're using a different RDP client, download the RDP file and then see the documentation for the RDP client for the steps to establish the RDP connection.

To connect to a Windows instance using an RDP client
On the Connect to instance page, choose Download remote desktop file. When the file download is finished, choose Cancel to return to the Instances page. The RDP file is downloaded to your Downloads folder.

Run mstsc.exe to open the RDP client.

Expand Show options, choose Open, and select the .rdp file from your Downloads folder.

By default, Computer is the public IPv4 DNS name of the instance and User name is the administrator account. To connect to the instance using IPv6 instead, replace the public IPv4 DNS name of the instance with its IPv6 address. Review the default settings and change them as needed.

Choose Connect. If you receive a warning that the publisher of the remote connection is unknown, choose Connect to continue.

Enter the password that you saved previously, and then choose OK.

Due to the nature of self-signed certificates, you might get a warning that the security certificate could not be authenticated. Do one of the following:

If you trust the certificate, choose Yes to connect to your instance.

[Windows] Before you proceed, compare the thumbprint of the certificate with the value in the system log to confirm the identity of the remote computer. Choose View certificate and then choose Thumbprint from the Details tab. Compare this value to the value of RDPCERTIFICATE-THUMBPRINT in Actions, Monitor and troubleshoot, Get system log.

[Mac OS X] Before you proceed, compare the fingerprint of the certificate with the value in the system log to confirm the identity of the remote computer. Choose Show Certificate, expand Details, and choose SHA1 Fingerprints. Compare this value to the value of RDPCERTIFICATE-THUMBPRINT in Actions, Monitor and troubleshoot, Get system log.

If the RDP connection is successful, the RDP client displays the Windows login screen and then the Windows desktop. If you receive an error message instead, see Remote Desktop can't connect to the remote computer. When you are finished with the RDP connection, you can close the RDP client.

Step 3: Clean up your instance

Warning
Terminating an instance is permanent and irreversible.

After you terminate an instance, you can no longer connect to it, and it can't be recovered. All attached Amazon EBS volumes that are configured to be deleted on termination are also permanently deleted and can't be recovered. All data stored on instance store volumes is permanently lost. For more information, see How instance termination works.

Before you terminate an instance, ensure that you have backed up all data that you need to retain after the termination to persistent storage.

After you've finished with the instance that you created for this tutorial, you should clean up by terminating the instance. If you want to do more with this instance before you clean up, see Next steps.

You'll stop incurring charges for that instance or usage that counts against your Free Tier limits as soon as the instance status changes to shutting down or terminated. To keep your instance for later, but not incur charges or usage that counts against your Free Tier limits, you can stop the instance now and then start it again later. For more information, see Stop and start Amazon EC2 instances.

To terminate your instance
In the navigation pane, choose Instances. In the list of instances, select the instance.

Choose Instance state, Terminate (delete) instance.

Choose Terminate (delete) when prompted for confirmation.

Amazon EC2 shuts down and terminates your instance. After your instance is terminated, it remains visible on the console for a short while, and then the entry is automatically deleted. You cannot remove the terminated instance from the console display yourself.

To ensure the maximum benefit from Amazon EC2, we recommend that you perform the following best practices.

Security
Manage access to AWS resources and APIs using identity federation with an identity provider and IAM roles whenever possible. For more information, see Identity providers and federation in the IAM User Guide.

Implement the least permissive rules for your security group.

Regularly patch, update, and secure the operating system and applications on your instance. For more information, see Update management. For guidelines specific to Windows operating systems, see Security best practices for Windows instances.

Use Amazon Inspector to automatically discover and scan Amazon EC2 instances for software vulnerabilities and unintended network exposure. For more information, see the Amazon Inspector User Guide.

Use AWS Security Hub CSPM controls to monitor your Amazon EC2 resources against security best practices and security standards. For more information about using Security Hub CSPM, see Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud controls in the AWS Security Hub CSPM User Guide.

Storage
Understand the implications of the root volume type for data persistence, backup, and recovery. For more information, see Root volume type.

Use separate Amazon EBS volumes for the operating system versus your data. Ensure that the volume with your data persists after instance termination. For more information, see Preserve data when an instance is terminated.

Use the instance store available for your instance to store temporary data. Remember that the data stored in instance store is deleted when you stop, hibernate, or terminate your instance. If you use instance store for database storage, ensure that you have a cluster with a replication factor that ensures fault tolerance.

Encrypt EBS volumes and snapshots. For more information, see Amazon EBS encryption in the Amazon EBS User Guide.

Resource management
Use instance metadata and custom resource tags to track and identify your AWS resources. For more information, see Use instance metadata to manage your EC2 instance and Tag your Amazon EC2 resources.

View your current limits for Amazon EC2. Plan to request any limit increases in advance of the time that you'll need them. For more information, see Amazon EC2 service quotas.

Use AWS Trusted Advisor to inspect your AWS environment, and then make recommendations when opportunities exist to save money, improve system availability and performance, or help close security gaps. For more information, see AWS Trusted Advisor in the AWS Support User Guide.

Backup and recovery
Regularly back up your EBS volumes using Amazon EBS snapshots, and create an Amazon Machine Image (AMI) from your instance to save the configuration as a template for launching future instances. For more information about AWS services that help achieve this use case, see AWS Backup and Amazon Data Lifecycle Manager.

Deploy critical components of your application across multiple Availability Zones, and replicate your data appropriately.

Design your applications to handle dynamic IP addressing when your instance restarts. For more information, see Amazon EC2 instance IP addressing.

Monitor and respond to events. For more information, see Monitor Amazon EC2 resources.

Ensure that you are prepared to handle failover. For a basic solution, you can manually attach a network interface or Elastic IP address to a replacement instance. For more information, see Elastic network interfaces. For an automated solution, you can use Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling. For more information, see the Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling User Guide.

Regularly test the process of recovering your instances and Amazon EBS volumes to ensure data and services are restored successfully.

Networking
Set the time-to-live (TTL) value for your applications to 255, for IPv4 and IPv6. If you use a smaller value, there is a risk that the TTL will expire while application traffic is in transit, causing reachability issues for your instances.

AWS Compute Optimizer provides Amazon EC2 recommendations to help you improve performance, save money, or both. You can use these recommendations to decide whether to change to a new instance type.

To make recommendations, Compute Optimizer analyzes your existing instance specifications and utilization metrics. The compiled data is then used to recommend which Amazon EC2 instance types are best able to handle the existing workload. Recommendations are returned along with per-hour instance pricing
Finding classifications

Compute Optimizer classifies its findings for EC2 instances as follows:

Under-provisioned – An EC2 instance is considered under-provisioned when at least one specification of your instance, such as CPU, memory, or network, does not meet the performance requirements of your workload. Under-provisioned EC2 instances might lead to poor application performance.

Over-provisioned – An EC2 instance is considered over-provisioned when at least one specification of your instance, such as CPU, memory, or network, can be sized down while still meeting the performance requirements of your workload, and when no specification is under-provisioned. Over-provisioned EC2 instances might lead to unnecessary infrastructure cost.

Optimized – An EC2 instance is considered optimized when all specifications of your instance, such as CPU, memory, and network, meet the performance requirements of your workload, and the instance is not over-provisioned. An optimized EC2 instance runs your workloads with optimal performance and infrastructure cost. For optimized instances, Compute Optimizer might sometimes recommend a new generation instance type.

None – There are no recommendations for this instance. This might occur if you've been opted in to Compute Optimizer for less than 12 hours, or when the instance has been running for less than 30 hours, or when the instance type is not supported by Compute Optimizer.

View recommendations

After you opt in to Compute Optimizer, you can view the findings that Compute Optimizer generates for your EC2 instances in the Amazon EC2 console. You can then access the Compute Optimizer console to view the recommendations. If you recently opted in, findings might not be reflected in the EC2 console for up to 12 hours.

To view recommendations for an instance using the Amazon EC2 console
Open the Amazon EC2 console at https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/.

In the navigation pane, choose Instances.

Choose the instance ID to open the instance detail page.

On the instance detail page, in the top summary section, locate AWS Compute Optimizer finding. If there is a finding, we display the finding classification and a link to view the details. Otherwise, we display No recommendations available for this instance.

If there is a finding, choose View detail. This opens the Recommendations for EC2 instances page in the Compute Optimizer console. The current instance type is labeled Current. There are also up to three instance type recommendations, labeled Option 1, Option 2, and Option 3. This page also shows recent CloudWatch metric data for the instance.

To view recommendations for all instances in all Regions
You can view recommendations for all of your Amazon EC2 instances in all Regions using the Compute Optimizer console. For more information, see Viewing EC2 instances recommendations and Viewing EC2 instance details in the AWS Compute Optimizer User Guide.

Considerations for evaluating recommendations

When you receive a recommendation, you must decide whether to act on it. Before changing an instance type, consider the following:

The recommendations don’t forecast your usage. Recommendations are based on your historical usage over the most recent 14-day time period. Be sure to choose an instance type that is expected to meet your future resource needs.

Focus on the graphed metrics to determine whether actual usage is lower than instance capacity. You can also view metric data (average, peak, percentile) in CloudWatch to further evaluate your EC2 instance recommendations. For example, notice how CPU percentage metrics change during the day and whether there are peaks that need to be accommodated. For more information, see Viewing Available Metrics in the Amazon CloudWatch User Guide.

Compute Optimizer might supply recommendations for burstable performance instances, which are T3, T3a, and T2 instances. If you periodically burst above the baseline, make sure that you can continue to do so based on the vCPUs of the new instance type. For more information, see Key concepts for burstable performance instances.

If you’ve purchased a Reserved Instance, your On-Demand Instance might be billed as a Reserved Instance. Before you change your current instance type, first evaluate the impact on Reserved Instance utilization and coverage.

Consider conversions to newer generation instances, where possible.

When migrating to a different instance family, make sure the current instance type and the new instance type are compatible, for example, in terms of virtualization, architecture, or network type. For more information, see Compatibility for changing the instance type.

Finally, consider the performance risk rating that's provided for each recommendation. Performance risk indicates the amount of effort you might need to spend in order to validate whether the recommended instance type meets the performance requirements of your workload. We also recommend rigorous load and performance testing before and after making any changes.

